The discrepancy between the versions of spring-webmvc that IntelliJ IDEA and Gradle are picking up can be due to a few reasons. Here are some steps to diagnose and resolve the issue:
1. Dependency Management
Ensure that you are using the correct version of Spring Boot in your build.gradle file. The Spring Boot version you specified is 3.3.0, which should pull in compatible versions of all Spring dependencies.
2. Dependency Resolution
Gradle might be resolving dependencies differently than IntelliJ IDEA. You can use the dependencyInsight task to understand why a particular version of a dependency is being resolved.

Run the following command to see the dependency tree for spring-webmvc:


./gradlew dependencyInsight --dependency spring-webmvc --configuration compileClasspath  
 

3. Dependency Constraints
Check if there are any dependency constraints or BOM (Bill of Materials) files that might be influencing the version of spring-webmvc.
4. Caches
Sometimes, Gradle or IntelliJ caches might cause inconsistencies. Try clearing the caches:
Gradle: Run ./gradlew clean build --refresh-dependencies.
IntelliJ IDEA: Invalidate caches by going to File -> Invalidate Caches / Restart.
5. Explicit Version Declaration
If the problem persists, you might need to explicitly declare the version of spring-webmvc in your dependencies block:

dependencies {  
    implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-web:3.3.0'  
    implementation 'org.springframework:spring-webmvc:6.1.8'  
    // Other dependencies  
}  
 

6. Dependency Management Plugin
Ensure that the io.spring.dependency-management plugin is properly applied and configured. This plugin helps manage dependency versions in a way that is consistent with Maven's BOM.
7. Version Conflicts
There might be a transitive dependency that is causing a version conflict. You can exclude the conflicting version:

dependencies {  
    implementation('org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-web:3.3.0') {  
        exclude group: 'org.springframework', module: 'spring-webmvc'  
    }  
    implementation 'org.springframework:spring-webmvc:6.1.8'  
    // Other dependencies  
}  
 

 If your build.gradle is located in a subdirectory and you are running Gradle commands from the root directory, you need to specify the path to the subproject. This can be done using Gradle's -p or --project-dir option.

Here's how you can run the dependencyInsight task for a subproject:

./gradlew -p path/to/subproject dependencyInsight --dependency spring-webmvc --configuration compileClasspath  
 
Replace path/to/subproject with the actual path to the directory containing your build.gradle file.
Example
 
Assume your project structure is as follows:

root-directory/  
├── gradlew  
├── gradlew.bat  
├── settings.gradle  
└── subproject/  
    └── build.gradle  
 
If your build.gradle is in the subproject directory, you would run:

./gradlew -p subproject dependencyInsight --dependency spring-webmvc --configuration compileClasspath  
 

Fixing the Configuration Not Found Issue
 
The error message "configuration 'compileClasspath' not found in configuration container" suggests that the configuration name might be different or that the project setup is not typical. Here are some steps to address this:
Check Configurations: List all configurations to ensure compileClasspath exists:


./gradlew -p subproject dependencies  
This will list all configurations and their dependencies. Look for the correct configuration name, which might be implementation or something else.
Use Correct Configuration: If compileClasspath is not the correct configuration, use the appropriate one. For example, if implementation is the correct configuration, run:


./gradlew -p subproject dependencyInsight --dependency spring-webmvc --configuration implementation  
 

Multi-Project Setup
 
If you have a multi-project setup, ensure your settings.gradle file in the root directory includes the subproject:

include 'subproject'  
 

Example settings.gradle
 


rootProject.name = 'root-project'  
include 'subproject'  
 

Example build.gradle for Subproject
 
Ensure your subproject's build.gradle properly applies the necessary plugins:

plugins {  
    id 'java'  
    id 'org.springframework.boot' version '3.3.0'  
    id 'io.spring.dependency-management' version '1.0.15.RELEASE'  
}  
  
dependencies {  
    implementation 'org.springframework.boot:spring-boot-starter-web'  
    // Other dependencies  
}  
 

Running the Task
 
After confirming the setup, run the dependencyInsight task with the correct path and configuration:

./gradlew -p subproject dependencyInsight --dependency spring-webmvc --configuration implementation  
 
This should give you detailed insight into why a particular version of spring-webmvc is being resolved.